# thesis
PhD thesis at UBC 2015-2019

I am interested in the evolution of recombination. If your interested in the theoretical part, Sally wrote a great review entitled The Evolutionary Enigma of Sex (http://www.zoology.ubc.ca/~otto/Reprints/Otto2009.pdf). As a consequence, I have also gained interest in the meiotic machinery which makes recombination possible. Because the proteins involved are highly conserved across phyla it is curious how the rates of recombination can differ markedly between closely related species. More specifically, there is the case of social insects (e.g. honeybees) who have a tenfold higher recombination rate than their solitary sister species (say, bumblebees). It seems like the eusociality can allow for higher recombination, and I want to figure out why. Sociality in insects does not lead to a higher rate of sexual mating, but rather the opposite. The effective population size in honey bees is minuscule, as there is only one reproducing individual (the queen) for each colony. The workers can be thought of as an extended phenotype of the queen, who’s reproductive success depends on how good her workforce is. I believe that the benefit of recombination is due to a phenomenon called similarity selection. Aneil Agrawal wrote a paper entitled ”Similarity selection and the Evolution of Sex: Revisiting the Red Queen” in 2006 in which he shows that recombination can be favored if offspring are more likely to contract a parasite from their mother than from a random individual, because it will be beneficial to have a different combination of allele from the mother. As worker bees are more related to each other than they are to their mother (haplo-diploidy is weird), low recombination rate would lead them to be quite similar. If a parasite would infect one of them, it could easily spread to the others, and the whole colony would be doomed! After all, a queen can not reproduce without her workers.
  Given that there is a strong directional selection for higher recombination (or, decreased selection for low recombination rate), how does the highly conserved meiotic machinery adapt? First, does it matter what protein (gear :wink: ) changes first, or are all components equally likely to contribute to the new phenotype (higher recombination rate)? Secondly, how will recombination rate increase? Will there be a few new spots of high recombination, or will recombination rate increase equally across the genome? In other words, is the recombination landscape adaptable on a local level? There is a lot to be said about the adaptability of the recombination landscape. For sure, there are locations in the genome where crossovers occur more readily than in others. These locations are highly conserved in yeast, which has lead some to suggest there is an adaptive advantage. Using a very different argument, the people studying recombination rates in bees have found that the position of recombination hotspots are correlated with genes coding for worker bee behaviours, suggesting that recombination hotspots can have a pivotal role in rapid evolutionary changes (the divergence of honey bees and bumble bees is quite recent). There is also molecular biologists who study how the physical properties of the chromosomes may lead to a higher likelihood of double strand breaks (consequently leading to crossovers). I’m still trying to connect the dots.
  In order to answer the question of the evolution of the meiotic machinery under direct selection, I am planning an experiment on yeast in the lab, where I will put them through strong selection for increased recombination between two markers (inserted genes), and observe if/how the global recombination rate changes, and what proteins respond in my different replicates. When I have seen an effect, I will stop selection and see if the recombination rate goes back to what it was when I started the experiment. By doing that, I should be able to estimate how costly the change in recombination rate was for the yeast. The Charlesworth couple (who are not only brilliant, but seem adorable) published a trilogy of papers in 1985 entitled "Genetic variation in recombination in Drosophila”, in which there is one part where they selected for higher recombination. However, they did not have the sequencing and bioinformatic tools that we have today, which will make it possible for us to see not only that recombination between two loci increases but also how it happens. Now, McDonald paper.
  Which brings us to the third part of my inquiry, which is if, and in that case how, you detect selection in genomic data. There are many ways to detect selection, by finding genes that are highly differentiated between two populations or species. Attempts to measure how strong the selective pressure for a particular gene variant was in the population, one uses the linkage to surrounding neutral loci. However, because linkage is strongly influenced by recombination rate (which sometimes is unknown, sometimes might have changed during the course of selection), it is very hard to get any reliable estimate for selection strength from genomic data. When it comes to signatures of selection, there are many examples out there. Some use simple F-statistics across the genome, trying to find spots of high differentiation between populations. Pardis Sabeti and colleagues published a paper in Nature 2002 where they described a model called Extended Haplotype Homozygosity, entitled "Detecting recent positive selection in the human genome from haplotype structure”. It is widely use in human genetics. You should check out Prof. Sabeti anyhow, my friend had her as a supervisor for one of his MSc projects, and we were laughing in disbelief at the Biography section of her wikipedia page: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pardis_Sabeti.
  Now, because yeast is a model organisms the position for the genes involved in meiosis and crossing over are well known. Since I have a rough estimate for selection strength from my experiment (and know for how many generations the yeast were put through this selection), it will be curious to see if I can find signatures of that selection on the candidate genes, and also see how far off the current methods to measure selection strength is from my experimental measurement.
  
  
  
